*** PAGE 49 (SRC 51) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
49 
 
rules, are necessary. In an electronic environment programmatically embedded instructions 
can verify compliance with the coding rules. 
Electronic 
Paper 
1. Enter the statement or term in the 
coding tool 
1. Look up the lead term in the Alphabetical 
Index and applicable secondary terms. 
2. Select the matching term, or the one 
closest to what you are looking for from 
amongst the displayed options 
2. Select the appropriate term, or one 
closest to what you are looking for, from 
amongst the listed options 
3. Verify the result in the tabular list 
browser view for exclusions, inclusions and 
notes given at the level of that category, its 
grouping levels and at the chapter level. 
3. Verify the result in the tabular list 
(Volume 1) for exclusions, inclusions and 
notes given at the level of that category, its 
grouping levels and at the chapter level. 
The WHO online browser and coding tool are available at https://icd.who.int. 
2.7 ICD–11 conventions 
ICD–11 has standard ways of presenting its content. Conventions describe textual content 
and also apply to the coding structure. 
2.7.1 Inclusions 
Within the coded categories there are typically other optional diagnostic terms. These are 
known as ‘inclusion terms’ and are given, in addition to the title, as examples of the 
diagnostic statements to be classified to that category. They may refer to different 
conditions or be synonyms. They are not a sub-classification of the category. 
Inclusion terms are listed primarily as a guide to the content of the category, in addition to 
the descriptions. Many of the items listed relate to important or common terms belonging 
to the category. Others are borderline conditions or sites listed to distinguish the boundary 
between one subcategory and another. The lists of inclusion terms are by no means 
exhaustive. 
Alternative names of diagnostic entities (synonyms) are included and shown in the 
electronic coding tool and the Alphabetic Index. 
It is sometimes necessary to read inclusion terms in conjunction with titles. This usually 
occurs when the inclusion terms describe lists of sites or pharmaceutical products, where 
appropriate words from the title (e.g. ‘malignant neoplasm of …’, ‘injury to …’, ‘toxic effects 
of …’) need to be understood. General diagnostic descriptions common to a range of 
categories, or to all the subcategories in a four-character category, are to be found in the 
notes heading ‘Inclusions’, immediately following a chapter, group, or category title. 
2.7.2 Exclusions 
Certain categories contain lists of conditions preceded by the word ‘Exclusions’. These are 
terms which are classified elsewhere. An example of this is 5A60 Hyperfunction of pituitary 
gland which excludes Cushing syndrome. 


*** PAGE 50 (SRC 52) ***
 
50 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Exclusions serve as a cross reference in ICD and help to delineate the boundaries of a 
category. 
General exclusions for a range of categories or for all subcategories are found in the notes 
heading ‘Excludes’, immediately following a chapter, group or category title. 
Multiple parenting in ICD-11 shows categories in the context of siblings that are placed 
elsewhere in the classification. This is also an indication of an exclusion and means ‘a sibling 
is coded elsewhere’. In the print and the electronic version this is marked with the label 
‘code elsewhere’. 
2.7.2.1 ‘Code also’ and ‘Use additional code, if desired’ instructions 
‘Code also’ instructions inform the user about required additional aetiological information 
which is mandatory to be coded in a cluster with certain categories because that additional 
information is relevant for primary tabulation. The ‘code also’ statement marks the 
categories that must be used in conjunction with the indicated second code(s). However, in 
some instances aetiology may be unknown although the condition requires treatment in its 
own right. In this circumstance, the code may be reported alone. 
For example, the category Diabetic cataract indicates ‘code also’ type of diabetes. This 
means that in conjunction with the code for ‘diabetic cataract’, the code for the type of 
diabetes should be assigned. Both stem codes for the type of diabetes and the diabetic 
cataract are always reported in a cluster. 
‘Use additional code, if desired’ - instructions inform the user about optional additional 
detail that can be coded. 
2.7.3 ‘NEC’ and ‘NOS’ 
2.7.3.1 ‘NEC’ 
The stem ‘not elsewhere classified’, when used in a category title, serve as a warning that 
certain specified variants of the listed conditions may appear in other parts of the 
classification. For example, NF09 Adverse effects, not elsewhere classified. Codes to which 
the NEC description is appended should only be used if one of the other options available in 
the classification is not suitable. 
2.7.3.2 ‘NOS’ 
The letters NOS are an abbreviation for the term ‘not otherwise specified’, implying that the 
documentation that is used for classifying does not provide more detail beyond the term 
provided. It implies ‘unspecified’, ‘incompletely specified’ or ‘unqualified’. Sometimes an 
unqualified term is nevertheless classified to a rubric for a more specific type of the 
condition. This is because, in medical terminology, the most common form of a condition is 
often known by the generic name of the condition itself and only the less common types are 
qualified. For example, ‘pharyngitis’ is commonly used to mean ‘acute pharyngitis’. These 
inbuilt assumptions have been taken into account in order to avoid incorrect classification. 
Careful inspection of inclusion terms will reveal where an assumption of cause has been 
accounted for. Coders should be careful not to code a term as unqualified unless it is quite 
clear that no information is available that would permit a more specific assignment 


*** PAGE 51 (SRC 53) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
51 
 
elsewhere. Similarly, in interpreting statistics based on the ICD, some conditions assigned to 
an apparently specified category will not have been so specified on the record that was 
coded. When comparing trends over time and interpreting statistics, it is important to be 
aware that assumptions may change from one revision of the ICD to another. For example, 
before the Eighth Revision, an unqualified aortic aneurysm was assumed to be due to 
syphilis (this is no longer the case since the introduction of ICD–10). In ICD-11 in most 
instances the ‘NOS’ terminology points to unspecified categories, so that future data 
analysis can take care of assumptions regarding the linguistic meaning. 
Additional terms permitted in ICD coding: 
• 
Certain 
• 
Other 
• 
Unspecified 
• 
And 
• 
Or 
• 
Due to 
• 
With 
• 
Caused by 
• 
Attributed to 
• 
Secondary to 
• 
Associated with 
2.7.4 ‘Certain’ 
The term ‘certain’ is used where certain entities that could be grouped in a specific location 
in the classification are grouped somewhere else outside the current chapter or block. For 
example, 8B22 Certain specified cerebrovascular diseases means that only some specified 
cerebrovascular diseases are coded here, whereas other specific types of cerebrovascular 
disease are located elsewhere in the classification. 
2.7.5 Residual categories – ‘Other’ and ‘Unspecified’ 
ICD-11 coding should always be completed to include the most specific level of detail 
possible with the use of one code or multiple codes as described above. There are, however, 
circumstances when that is not possible and for that reason the ICD-11 includes categories 
titled ‘other’ and ‘unspecified’. In some instances, necessary information to select a specific 
category may not be available in the source documentation. When this is the case, the 
residual category ‘unspecified’ is selected. Conversely, there are instances where the 
information in the source documentation is very specific, but the tabular list does not 
include a specific category. In this case, users identify the closest category match, and code 
to the residual category titled ‘other’. 
2.7.6 Use of ‘And’ and ‘Or’ 
The words ‘and’ and ‘or’ in ICD–11 are used in their meaning in formal logic. A term that 
includes a statement of the kind ‘A and B’ means that both A and B, have to be present in 
order to use that category. A term that includes a statement of the kind ‘A or B’ means that 
the category may be used if either A or B are present. 


*** PAGE 52 (SRC 54) ***
 
52 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
2.7.7 ‘Due to’ and ‘Associated with’ 
‘Due to’ is the preferred term for categories where two conditions are mentioned, and a 
causal sequence exists between them. Other terms, such as ‘caused by’ or ‘attributed to’ are 
allowable synonyms. The phrase ‘secondary to’ is equivalent and may also be included as a 
synonym. ‘Associated with’ is the preferred term for categories where two conditions are 
mentioned but there is no causal sequence implied. 
2.7.8 Spelling, parentheses, grammar and other conventions 
Spelling and grammar of ICD-11 follow the British rules with exceptions and amendments 
conforming to WHO spelling rules. The detailed conventions are listed below. The ICD-11 
terminology uses the following conventions: 
• 
Terms are listed in their singular form. For example, ‘Superficial injury of scalp’ 
instead of ‘Superficial injuries of scalp’. There are exceptions when the singular form 
doesn’t apply, such as ‘Multiple injuries of head’, and when a term describes a group 
of diseases, such as “Benign vascular neoplasms”. 
• 
No use of apostrophes with eponyms. For example, ‘Hodgkin lymphoma’ (instead of 
‘Hodgkin’s lymphoma’) 
• 
Entities are described using natural language. For example, ‘myocardial infarction’ 
(instead of ‘infarction, myocardial’). 
• 
Abbreviations are printed using upper case letters and followed by the complete title 
in full. For example, ‘MI – [myocardial infarction]’. 
• 
Parentheses are used in the tabular list to enclose the code to which an exclusion 
term refers. For example, 9A01.3 Infectious blepharitis Exclusions: 
Blepharoconjunctivitis (9A60.4) 
2.7.9 General features 
The main structural innovation of ICD–11 is that it is built on a Foundation component from 
which the tabular lists (such as the classification for morbidity and mortality statistics) is 
derived. See 1.2.5 Foundation Component and Tabular lists of ICD–11. 
Table 1: ICD-11 Terminology 


*** PAGE 53 (SRC 55) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
53 
 
ICD-11 Term 
Explanation 
Foundation 
component 
Underlying data base content that holds all necessary information to 
generate print versions of the tabular list and the alphabetical index, 
as well as additional information that is needed to generate 
specialty linearisations of ICD-11 and country specific modifications. 
Stem code 
Stem codes are codes that can be used alone. They are found in the 
tabular list of ICD-11 for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics. Stem 
codes may be entities or groupings of high relevance, or clinical 
conditions that should always be described as one single category. 
The design of stem codes makes sure that in use cases that require 
only one code per case, a meaningful minimum of information is 
collected. 
Extension code 
Extension codes are lists of additional information that can be is 
added to a stem code when users and settings are interested in 
reporting more detail. Extension codes are not mutually exclusive. 
They are not designed to be a classification but may show 
hierarchies and can never be used without a stem code in the 
context of statistical classification. Extension codes can never 
appear in the first position in a cluster. Extension codes may be used 
alone in another context, e.g. for device documentation. 
Precoordination 
Stem codes may contain all pertinent information about a clinical 
concept in a pre-combined fashion. This is referred to as 
‘precoordination’. 
 
Example: BD50.40 Abdominal aortic aneurysm with perforation 
 
Example: CA40.04 Pneumonia due to Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
Postcoordination 
The use of multiple codes (i.e. stem codes and/or extension codes) 
together to fully describe a documented clinical concept. 
Postcoordination is by matter of principle permitted with all axes, as 
long as at least one stem code is used. API, Browser and coding tool 
facilitate postcoordination in certain areas. Other areas of 
postcoordination have to be coded individually, but may be 
supported by future updates of ICD-11, where need arises. 
Cluster 
A cluster is the postcoordinated entities that are joined using either 
a forward slash (/) or ampersand (&). 
 
Example: 
 
Diagnosis: Duodenal ulcer with acute haemorrhage 
 
Cluster: DA63.Z/ME24.90 
 
Condition - DA63 Duodenal ulcer, unspecified 
 
Has manifestation (use additional code, if desired) - ME24.90 Acute 
gastrointestinal bleeding, not elsewhere classified 


*** PAGE 54 (SRC 56) ***
 
54 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
ICD-11 Term 
Explanation 
Primary and 
secondary parents 
The hierarchy of ICD-11 is defined the same as it was in previous 
versions of ICD. The ability to connect specific diseases and concepts 
within the classification to another parent code was introduced to 
enable specific extracts of the Tabular list for medical specialties or 
for specific use cases. 
 
Example: A code for a malignant neoplasm of the skin is in the 
chapter for malignant neoplasms. The primary parent for this code 
is a code or a block from this chapter. However, a medical doctor 
treating only skin diseases might want to see only codes from the 
classification that are relevant for his or her specific clinical purpose. 
Therefore, a secondary parent was defined in the skin chapter which 
will only show the code in this chapter if the specific extract of 
codes for his or her use case is selected. 
2.8 Stem codes 
ICD–11 stem codes are codes in a particular tabular list that can be used alone. Stem codes 
may be entities or groupings of high relevance, or clinical entities that should always be 
described as one entity. The design of stem codes makes sure that in use cases that require 
only one code per case a meaningful minimum of information is collected. 
The stem codes of the ICD-11 are organised in 26 chapters that follow the traditional 
pattern of the ICD, relating to aetiology, relevant organ system, maternal status, perinatal 
status, external causes, and factors influencing health status. 
2.9 Extension codes 
Extension codes are provided for use as supplementary or additional codes when it is 
desired to identify more detail in classification entities elsewhere. The inclusion of the new 
Extension codes in ICD–11 provides capacity for coding qualifying information and are linked 
to stem codes. Extension codes have been designed to standardise the way additional 
information is added to stem codes, and the adoption of multi-dimensional coding results in 
a substantially reduced amount of stem codes. Extension codes may be used alone in other 
contexts, e.g. device documentation. 
Extension codes are not mutually exclusive. They are not a classification and can never be 
used without a stem code for statistical purposes. Extension codes can never appear in the 
first position in a classification cluster. One or more extension codes can be linked when 
coding a specific condition. 
There are two main types of Extension codes: 
• 
Type 1 extension codes allow the user to add detail to a stem code in terms of severity, 
temporality, anatomy, histopathology of the condition or other dimensions like substances 
and medical devices. For example, if the diagnostic statement reads ‘cervical disc prolapse 
C5-C6’ the anatomy extension code XA1X49 Cervical intervertebral disc or space C5-C6 can 
be added to the stem code FA80.1 Intervertebral disc degeneration of cervical spine with 
prolapsed disc in order to capture the detail of contained in the diagnostic statement. 


*** PAGE 55 (SRC 57) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
55 
 
• 
Type 2 extension codes represent diagnosis code descriptors which indicate how the 
diagnosis is to be used and/or interpreted. The meaning of the code refers to the same 
condition, but the use of type 2 – diagnosis code descriptor extension code alters its 
interpretation. For example, for adverse event reporting it is important to code diagnosis 
timing in terms of XY6M Present on admission, XY69 Developed after admission, or XY85 
Uncertain timing of onset relative to admission. 
Overview of the Type 1 Extension codes 
• 
Severity scale value 
• 
Temporality (course of the condition) 
• 
Aetiology 
• 
Topology Scale Value 
• 
Anatomy and topography 
• 
Histopathology 
• 
Dimensions of injury 
• 
Dimensions of external causes 
• 
Consciousness 
• 
Substances 
• 
ICD-O 
• 
Health Devices, Equipment and Supplies 
Overview of Type 2 – Extension codes - Diagnosis Code Descriptors 
• 
Discharge diagnosis types 
• 
Diagnosis timing 
• 
Diagnosis timing in relation to surgical procedure 
• 
Diagnosis method of confirmation 
• 
Diagnosis certainty 
• 
Obstetrical diagnosis timing 
• 
Encounter descriptors 
• 
Capacity or context 
2.10 Precoordination and postcoordination 
Some stem codes contain all pertinent information about a clinical concept in a pre-
combined fashion. This is referred to as ‘precoordination’. 
A health condition may be further described to any level of detail, by applying more than 
one code, or by ‘postcoordinating’ (i.e. combining codes): 
• 
two or more stem codes, (i.e. code1/code2) 
• 
stem codes with one or more extension codes. (i.e. stem code&extension 
code1&extension code2) 
A group of codes that have been postcoordinated is called a ‘cluster’. A forward slash (/) or 
ampersand (&) is used to show the linkage between postcoordinated codes. In this manner, 
the classification can address many clinical concepts with a limited range of categories. 


*** PAGE 56 (SRC 58) ***
 
56 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 
Precoordination of concepts in a single code Condition: 2C25.2 Squamous cell carcinoma of 
bronchus or lung has precoordination, both site and pathology are combined in a single 
precoordinated stem code. 
Example 
Postcoordination of concepts combined in a cluster: the condition urinary tract infection 
due to Extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing Escherichia coli’ is expressed through a 
combination of two linked or postcoordinated stem codes. Condition: GC08.0 Urinary tract 
infection, site not specified, due to Escherichia coli Associated with (use additional code, if 
desired): MG50.27 Extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing Escherichia coli Cluster 
code: GC08.0/MG50.27 
Postcoordination axis 
Description 
‘Has causing condition’ - this field is 
indicating the causing condition that must 
be coded when known. The causing 
condition can be compared to the ‘dagger’ 
code in ICD-10. This option is found at 
entities that are typically caused by a range 
of different conditions and is referred to as 
mandatory postcoordination in the Coding 
tool. 
It is mandatory to code the causing 
condition for primary tabulation when it is 
known. ‘Has causing condition’ is added to 
categories that are caused by an 
underlying disease. For example, 
retinopathy has a ‘causing condition’ of 
diabetes. Causing conditions should be 
considered required in almost all 
situations, and must be used for 
conditions that are manifestations. 
‘Has manifestation’ - prompts the user to 
code any manifestations. Manifestations can 
be compared to the ‘asterisk’ codes in ICD-
10. This option is found at entities that can 
develop manifestations. 
It is optional to code manifestations of a 
disease. For example, diabetes ‘Has 
manifestations’ such as retinopathy. This 
coding should be considered ‘Allowed’ in 
almost all situations. The listed 
manifestations are usually a sample of the 
ones frequently resulting from the 
condition. 
‘Associated with’ - when conditions are 
captured together for a full picture but do 
not necessarily represent a cause and effect 
scenario. 
This field is used when multiple codes are 
required to fully describe a condition. For 
example, ‘Associated with’ is used to link 
the codes for antimicrobial resistance to 
the codes for the infection. This coding can 
be either ‘Allowed’ or ‘Required’ 
depending on the situation. 
Special cases for postcoordination: 


*** PAGE 57 (SRC 59) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
57 
 
1. 
External cause codes are ‘allowed’ to identify the cause of an injury and are 
‘associated with’ the injuries. 
2. 
The external cause code to identify a specific drug is ‘allowed’ with entities beginning 
with or including the phrase ‘Drug -induced’. 
3. 
External cause codes for the mode and mechanism of health care related harm are 
‘associated with’ the codes for the harm. 
2.10.1 Adding detail – postcoordination and cluster coding with multiple stem codes 
and extension codes 
Information about the aetiology and the manifestation of the condition of interest should 
be coded. In some instances, the ICD code refers to both (i.e. precoordinated), while in 
other instances more than one stem code (and/or extension code) needs to be used in order 
to express the relevant detail. This requires postcoordination. 
Note: When a condition is already precoordinated and given an ICD-11 MMS code, the 
existing precoordinated ICD-11 MMS stem code must be used. Postcoordination must never 
be used to replicate the meaning of a precoordinated code. 
Also note that all ICD entities in the Foundation have a uniform resource identifier (URI). If a 
particular entity does not have an ICD-11 MMS code, and collection of a more 
detailed/specific entity is required for selected national needs, a country may collect the URI 
for this purpose. Refer to section 2.12 Electronic recording and reporting. 
E.g. Acute bleeding duodenal ulcer 
Stem Code: DA63.Z Duodenal ulcer, unspecified Has manifestation (use additional code, if desired): 
ME24.90 Acute gastrointestinal bleeding, not elsewhere classified Cluster: DA63.Z/ME24.90 
E.g. Acute RSV bronchiolitis 
Code: CA41.0 Acute bronchiolitis due to respiratory syncytial virus Explanation: Since RSV bronchiolitis is 
a precoordinated concept in ICD-11, it is incorrect/prohibited to replicate the meaning of the diagnostic 
statement using a stem code and extension code (i.e. do not code: [CA41.Z] Acute bronchiolitis, 
unspecified&XN275 Human respiratory syncytial virus) 
E.g. Fracture, shaft of ulna 
Code: NC32.2 Fracture of shaft of ulna Explanation: Since fracture of shaft of ulna is a precoordinated 
concept in ICD-11, it is incorrect/prohibited to replicate the meaning of the diagnostic statement using a 
stem code and extension code (i.e. do not code: NC32.Z Fracture of forearm, unspecified&XA8U33 shaft of 
the ulna) 
There may be less obvious cases across the ICD. In an electronic environment, 
programmatically embedded instructions will help to avoid this kind of mistake. For 
reporting purposes, any correlated codes are linked using a forward slash (/) between stem 
codes and an ampersand (&) to separate stem codes with extension codes. 
2.10.2 Combining stem codes and extension codes, and how to order these in a complex 
code cluster 
Stem codes from other parts of ICD and extension codes can be linked together to describe 
a clinical concept in detail. They have to be grouped together in data transmission and 
evaluation in order to not lose the information conveyed by the joint group of codes. Such a 


*** PAGE 58 (SRC 60) ***
 
58 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
group of codes is called a cluster. Cluster coding requires use of a specific syntax to indicate 
which codes belong together when postcoordination is used. This syntax has to comply with 
the following rules: 
1. 
If only one stem code is coded, no clustering mechanisms need to be observed. 
  
E.g. Condition: Acute ST elevation myocardial infarction BA41.0 Acute ST elevation myocardial 
infarction 
2. 
When postcoordinating to form a cluster, stem codes are always coded before extension 
codes. (Note, however, the complex clustering scenario depicted in Example 5 below, where 
a combination of multiple stem codes and linked extension codes are combined in a single 
complex cluster). 
3. 
If one stem code is postcoordinated with one or more extension codes, the combining 
syntax used is the ampersand (&). 
Example 1: Acute ST elevation myocardial infarction, anterior wall, LAD 
Condition (code) - Acute ST elevation myocardial infarction BA41.0 Acute ST elevation myocardial 
infarction Specific anatomy - XA7RE3 Anterior wall of heart 
Specific anatomy - XA7NQ7 Left anterior descending coronary artery Cluster: BA41.0&XA7RE3&XA7NQ7 
Example 2: Acute pyelonephritis, left side, E. coli Condition (code) - GB51 Acute 
pyelonephritis 
Laterality - XK8G Left Infectious agent - XN6P4 Escherichia coli Cluster: GB51&XK8G&XN6P4 
4. 
If two stem codes are postcoordinated to provide additional detail, it is important to 
follow the order (within a cluster) according to the use case (e.g. mortality or 
morbidity). The first stem code will be separated from the second stem code by a 
slash (/). 
If only one code can be retained during data analysis for mortality (underlying cause of 
death) and public health prevention, priority of order should be given to the code that best 
describes the aetiology of a condition. If only one code can be retained for morbidity data 
analysis, priority should be given to the main condition (reason for admission after study 
established at the end of the episode of health care). 
Example 3: Mortality (underlying cause of death) code ordering within a cluster 
Patient died because of their diabetic coma. The patient had Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Condition (terminal 
cause of death): 5A23 Diabetic coma Condition (underlying cause of death): 5A11 Type 2 diabetes mellitus 
Mortality cluster order: 5A11/5A23 
Example 4: Morbidity (main condition) code ordering within a cluster (if only one code can 
be retained during data analysis) 
Patient admitted to hospital in a diabetic coma. The patient had Type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Main condition: 5A23 Diabetic coma Other condition: 5A11 Type 2 diabetes mellitus Morbidity cluster 
order: 5A23/5A11 
5. 
If a stem code is postcoordinated with extension codes and another stem code with 
some more extension codes is also coded within a cluster, the specific syntax should 
be designed to make a clear distinction between which extension codes in the 
cluster belong to which stem codes. The following syntax must be followed: The first 
stem code is reported, followed by an ‘&’ followed by one or more extension codes, 


*** PAGE 59 (SRC 61) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
59 
 
each of them separated by ‘&’. Then a slash ‘/’ separates this first section of the 
cluster from the next stem code which is followed by ‘&’ and the extension codes for 
this specific stem code, each again separated by ‘&’. 
Example 5: stem code & extension code / stem code & extension code & extension code 
Left inguinal hernia with acute obstruction Condition (code) - DD51 Inguinal hernia 
Laterality - XK8G Left 
Has manifestation (use additional code, if desired) - ME24.2 Digestive system obstruction 
Temporal pattern and onset - XT5R Acute Cluster: DD51&XK8G/ME24.2&XT5R 
Postcoordination is only to be used to combine codes to describe and fully characterise a 
documented clinical concept. If the documentation describes two distinct clinical concepts 
that are represented by separate stem codes, they should not be reported together in a 
postcoordinated cluster. 
Example 6: Pedestrian fall injury 
Concussion and open fracture shaft of left ulna due to fall on uneven sidewalk: 
Condition (code) 1 - NA07.0Z Concussion, unspecified 
Associated with (use additional code, if desired) - PA60 Unintentional fall on the same level or from less 
than 1 metre 
Object or substance producing injury - XE1DA Uneven surface, not elsewhere classified 
Place of occurrence - XE53A Sidewalk Cluster - NA07.0/ PA60& XE1DA&XE53A 
Condition (code) 2 - NC32.2 Fracture of shaft of ulna 
Laterality - XK8G Left 
Fracture open or closed - XJ7YM Open fracture 
Associated with: PA60 Unintentional fall on the same level or from less than 1 metre 
Objects of living things involved in causing - XE1DA Uneven surface, not elsewhere classified 
Place of occurrence - XE53A Sidewalk Cluster: NC32.2 & XK8G& XJ7YM /PA60 & XE1DA & XE53A 
Programmatically embedded instructions in the Foundation component of ICD-11 facilitate 
use of frequently used code combinations. Code combinations are not limited to the ones 
facilitated by these instructions. Additional instructions are added, based on user demands. 
2.10.3 Diagnosis Timing - ‘Present on admission’ vs. ‘Developed after admission’ 
Among the new Type 2 Extension codes -Diagnosis Code Descriptors, diagnosis timing is the 
particularly important set of extension codes that allow for distinction of diagnoses present 
on admission from diagnoses arising after admission, i.e. during the period of 
hospitalisation. 
The latter distinction is particularly important, because it allows for the targeted 
identification of a number of in-hospital diagnoses that may represent adverse events 
associated with health care. The majority of coded concepts in a hospital record are 
conditions present on admission. Recognising this, it will be of significant interest to flag a 
diagnosis that developed after admission. 
Example 1: 
A patient with long-standing type 1 diabetes, admitted to hospital because of a myocardial infarction. 
Main condition: Myocardial infarction 
Other condition: Diabetes mellitus, type 1 


*** PAGE 60 (SRC 62) ***
 
60 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
In this instance, both conditions are present at admission, but one of them (myocardial infarction) does 
not need to be coded as being ‘present on admission’ because it is the main condition, designated in this 
example as being ‘the condition that is determined to be the reason for admission, established at the end 
of the episode of health care’. The appropriate coding of this scenario therefore includes two clusters, 
each of which involves a stem code linked to an accompanying extension code i.e.: 
• 
‘Stem code for acute myocardial infarction’&‘Discharge Diagnosis Type Extension 
code for main condition’; BA41.Z&XY0Y 
• 
‘Stem code for diabetes mellitus type 1’&‘Diagnosis timing Extension code for 
present on admission’; 5A10&XY6M 
Note that for both coded entities in the above example, an ampersand (&) is used. In the 
first cluster, the stem code for myocardial infarction is linked to a diagnosis type extension 
code for main condition diagnosis type. In the second cluster, the stem code for diabetes 
mellitus type 1 is linked to a diagnosis timing extension code for present on admission. 
Example 2: 
A patient with long-standing type 1 diabetes, admitted to hospital because of chest pain. After assessment 
diagnosed with myocardial infarction. The patient develops deep vein thrombosis in right lower limb as 
an in-hospital complication of care. 
Main condition: Myocardial infarction 
Other conditions: Diabetes mellitus, type 1; Deep vein thrombosis (arising after hospital stay began) 
In this example, a diagnosis timing extension code for ‘developed after admission’ is linked 
by cluster coding to a stem code for ‘deep vein thrombosis’. The first two diagnostic 
concepts, meanwhile, are coded exactly as per the preceding example. i.e. 
• 
‘Stem code for acute myocardial infarction’&‘Discharge Diagnosis Type Extension 
code for main condition’; BA41&XY0Y 
• 
‘Stem code for diabetes mellitus type 1’&‘Diagnosis Timing Extension code for 
present on admission’; 5A10&XY6M 
• 
‘Stem code for lower limb deep vein thrombosis’&‘Right’&‘Diagnosis Timing 
Extension code for developed after admission’; BD71.4&XK9K&XY69 
Again, each of the three cluster entities uses an ampersand ‘&’ because the second code 
(and third code) in the cluster is an extension code. 
2.11 Functioning section 
The Functioning section of ICD-11 allows coding and assessment of functioning in line with 
ICF but at an operational level. For detailed recording and assessment, the full ICF should be 
used. This section’s concepts are aligned with ICF and allow an easy transition to ICF. The 
design of the functioning section in ICD-11 addresses documentation and assessment of the 
level of functioning of persons, for 


*** PAGE 61 (SRC 63) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
61 
 
• 
general medical practice, as work incapacity assessment 
• 
social benefits as for disability, or accident pension 
• 
payment or reimbursement purposes 
• 
needs assessment as in rehabilitation, occupational assistance, or long term care 
• 
outcome evaluation of treatment 
The functioning section in ICD-11 provides clinician-friendly tools for standardized 
assessment and documentation of functioning. The functioning section of ICD-11 allows for 
adding future additional assessment instruments. 
2.11.1 Functioning assessment 
2.11.1.1 WHO DAS 2.0: features and use cases 
The WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHO-DAS 2.0) is the internationally, culturally 
and socioeconomically validated generic functioning assessment instrument for an adult 
population. WHO DAS 2.0 is focused on ICF Activity and Participation domains and allows to 
compute an overall and domain specific functioning score covering the following domains: 
• 
Cognition – understanding & communicating 
• 
Mobility– moving & getting around 
• 
Self-care– hygiene, dressing, eating & staying alone 
• 
Getting along– interacting with other people 
• 
Life activities– domestic responsibilities, leisure, work & school 
• 
Participation – joining in community activities, participating in society 
WHO DAS scoring takes into account multiple levels of difficulty for each WHODAS 2.0 item 
(i.e. IRT based scoring). This type of scoring for WHODAS 2.0 allows for more fine-grained 
analyses that make use of the full information of the response categories for comparative 
analysis across populations or subpopulations. It takes the coding for each item response as 
“none”, “mild”, “moderate”, “severe” and “extreme” separately, and then uses a 
computation to determine the summary score by differentially weighting the items and the 
levels of severity. 
The scoring has three steps: 
• 
Step 1 – Summing of recoded item scores within each domain. 
• 
Step 2 – Summing of all six domain scores. 
• 
Step 3 – Converting the summary score into a metric ranging from 0 to 100 (where 0 
= no disability; 100 = full disability). 
The WHO DAS 2.0 scoring syntax is listed online via the link shared below. 
Key features of WHO-DAS 2.0 include: 
• 
ICF derived clinical scale with well-established psychometric properties of validity, reliability 
and sensitivity to change over time. 
• 
Cardinal measure which is applicable across all health conditions and allows to generate an 
overall and domain specific functioning scores. 


*** PAGE 62 (SRC 64) ***
 
62 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
• 
Established population norms. 
  
The combination of this features sets WHO DAS 2.0 apart from other clinical instruments. 
  
WHO DAS 2.0 can be used for assessment of functioning in multiple use cases: 
• 
Clinicians can quantify the effectiveness of their intervention within their clinical population 
and with reference to the general population. 
• 
Disability evaluators can determine disability status in fair, transparent, impartial and 
comparable way. 
• 
Reimbursement experts can measure quality (functioning outcome) of Case-mix/DRG 
groups. 
WHO DAS 2.0 has been developed for use in adult population and currently does not assess 
body impairments or environmental factors. Users who wish to asses impairments in body 
functions and can make use of the WHO Model Disability Survey (MDS)[1] items which are 
also included in the function assessment part of the V Chapter. 
WHO DAS 2.0 versions in three different formats (i.e. clinician administered, self-
administered and proxy-administered) can be found via the link below. 
WHO DAS 2.0 manual provides practical guidance for administering and scoring WHO DAS 
2.0. including information on the simple and complex (Item-Response-Theory, IRT) scoring 
algorithm and population norms for the WHO DAS 12 and 36 item version. The WHO DAS 
2.0 manual can be downloaded from the WHO website link - WHO Disability Assessment 
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) - https://www.who.int/standards/classifications/international-
classification-of-functioning-disability-and-health/who-disability-assessment-schedule 
together with other languages version of the WHO DAS 2.0. 
[1] The MDS is a ICF based general population survey developed by WHO and the World 
Bank that provides detailed and nuanced information on the lives of people with disability. 
It allows direct comparison between groups with differing levels and profiles of disability. 
2.11.1.2 WHO DAS 2.0: representation and coding structure 
To enable easy information retrieval each WHO DAS 2.0 item has an assigned alphanumeric 
code to represent the captured concepts of the respective item. The code starts with the 
letters “VD” followed by a randomly assign number. Additional item specific information 
and values (i.e. item question, five-point response scale) are included in the ICD-11 APIs to 
allow for easy integration of the instrument and the automated scoring computation in any 
software application (e.g. integration of WHO DAS 2.0 as health outcome measure in EMR 
software). The six WHO DAS 2.0 domains under which the 36 items of the instrument are 
grouped are represented as block heading. Like other ICD-11 block headings they are 
assigned an URI but not a code. Table 1 below shows an example of how a WHO DAS 2.0 
item are represented. 


*** PAGE 63 (SRC 65) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
63 
 
WHO DAS 2.0 item 
ICD-11 Code 
URI 
Attention functions 
VD00 
http://id.who.int/icd/entity/532448599 
Item description 
question 
Item response scale 
value set 
Mapped ICF category 
Because of your health 
condition, in the past 30 
days, how much difficulty 
did you have in 
concentrating on doing 
something for ten 
minutes? 
1=no difficulty, 
2=mild difficulty, 
3=moderate 
difficulty, 4=severe 
difficulty, 
5=complete 
difficulty 
d160 Focusing attention 
2.11.2 Generic functioning entity 
2.11.2.1 Functioning entities: features and use cases 
The main tool for documenting functioning is a list of generic functioning domains derived 
from the ICF Annex 9 and the ICF generic core set. 
The generic list allows clinicians to generate a coded functioning profile of an individual 
which can be used for multiple purposes like - goal setting - monitoring change - 
communicating across the continuum of care. 
Because the list is directly linked to the ICF, it may - Facilitate joint use of ICD & ICF (code 
once – use multiple times) - Serve as an entry point the use of the full ICF. 
2.11.2.2 Functioning entity: representation and coding structure 
In accordance with the WHO FIC content model a functioning entity has two components 
i.e. category and a qualifier. Both have an assigned alphanumeric code and an URI to 
represent the captured concepts. The code starts with the letters “VV” followed by a 
randomly assign number. The functioning category and the qualifier are linked through 
postcoordination. 
2.12 Electronic recording and reporting 
Electronic documentation will follow the principle of lossless collection of information at the 
source. Best practice includes reporting of: 
1. 
A text field that captures the clinical term or cause of death with the exact wording 
reported by the health provider, and 
2. 
A data field that retains the identifier (URI) of the chosen entity of ICD-11 (index, 
code title or other element) that represents the most exact match for that text. 
3. 
A data field for the relevant ICD-11 code. 
In this way, the quality of the coding can be verified at any point in time. Also, specific 
conditions can be identified and analysed, independently of them being linked to an 
individual ICD code or lumped together in a code with other conditions. 
Coding shall be done using tools based on the ICD-11 API, like the ICD-11 coding tool. 
Software must not include lists or other prompts to guide the recording or coding, as these 


*** PAGE 64 (SRC 66) ***
 
64 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
necessarily limit the range of diagnoses and therefore have negative impact on the accuracy 
and usefulness of the record and report. 
2.13 Foundation Component and Tabular lists 
The Foundation Component is a multi-dimensional collection of all ICD entities. Entities can 
be diseases, disorders, injuries, external causes, signs and symptoms. Some entities may be 
very broad, for example ‘Injuries to the elbow or forearm’, while others are more detailed, 
for example ‘Fracture of upper end of ulna, extending into joint’. The Foundation 
Component also has the necessary information to use the entities to build a tabular list. The 
Foundation Component includes information on where and how a certain entity is 
represented in a tabular list, whether it becomes a grouping, a category with a stem code, 
or whether it is mentioned as an inclusion term in a particular category. 
Several different tabular lists can be built from the Foundation Component. Drawing on the 
same Foundation Component, a set of tabular lists that builds on the same hierarchical tree 
structure can be created – producing congruent tabular lists. The Foundation Component 
includes instructions on how to combine certain codes in a tabular list to achieve more 
detail in coding. These rules help coders and computer systems to visualise the permitted 
code combinations when they are using a tabular list. 
Core tabular lists for international use: 
• 
Mortality and Morbidity Statistics (MMS) 
• 
Primary care low resources settings (PCL) 
• 
Verbal Autopsy (VA) 
• 
Startup Mortality List (SMoL) 
The full name of such a tabular list will always include ‘ICD–11’, e.g. ICD–11 MMS. 
In a Tabular list, entities of the Foundation Component become categories. The categories 
are mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive and linked to a mono hierarchical tree (they 
have only one parent). The information related to an entity that has become a category and 
has multiple parents is still available from the Foundation. This information can be used to 
visualise that category in more than one place in the Tabular list, e.g. showing them in black 
in its place for reference tabulation and in grey in any other place for browsing or 
alternative tabulations. ICD–11 has multiple congruent tabular lists with varying levels of 
detail. 
The Foundation Component is also the data source for production and maintenance of 
Tabular lists, index and the Reference Guide. It also includes additional content (see 
‘content model’) that goes beyond the traditional paper-based use of a classification. 
Depending on the setting within a country, it may be decided to use the full Foundation 
Component or to focus on the parts that are essential to production and maintenance of the 
Index and the Tabular list. 
The Foundation Component serves to align the content of the different tabular lists and to 
define their categories. As such it allows standardised use of the ICD-11, independent of the 
setting in which it is used. The Foundation Component includes, for example, links to other 
classifications or terminologies that can be expanded in the future. Please note that the 


*** PAGE 65 (SRC 67) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
65 
 
mention of a term or entity in the Foundation exclusively serves ontological purposes. 
Mention of a term or entity in the Foundation does not mean approval or endorsement of a 
particular condition. 
2.14 Main uses of the ICD: Mortality 
This section concerns the rules and guidelines adopted by the World Health Assembly 
regarding the selection of a single cause or condition for routine tabulation from death 
certificates. Guidelines are also provided for the application of the rules and for coding of 
the condition selected for tabulation. Implementation of the ICD for mortality requires 
setting up an infrastructure for reporting and storing information, designing information 
flows, quality assurance and feedback, and training for classification users working with the 
input or output of data. 
Following the introductory information in this Section and 2.15, Section 2.16 explains the 
basic concepts used in mortality coding. Sections 2.17 - 2.21, supplemented by Annexes in 
Section 3.14, guides how to code and identify the underlying cause of death, and Section 
2.25 explains descriptions used in statistical tabulation and international reporting for 
mortality. 
2.15 Mortality statistics 
Mortality statistics are widely used for medical research, monitoring of public health, 
evaluating health interventions, allocation of health resources and planning and for, and 
follow-up of health care. Analysis of mortality data typically involves comparisons of data 
sets, for example those representing different geographical regions or different points in 
time. Unless the data have been produced by the same methods and according to the same 
standards, such comparisons will yield misleading results. 
To standardise production of mortality data, WHO issues international instructions on data 
collection, coding and classification, and statistical presentation of causes of death. It is of 
utmost importance that production of mortality data follows the procedures detailed next, 
since any deviation from the international instructions will impair international 
comparability. The description of a single underlying cause of death, and selected 
approaches to capture further information on causes of death also reported on a certificate, 
enables the identification of trends in health for a given population. The following sections 
contain information on coding causes of death for mortality statistics. They explain the basic 
concepts, how to code conditions reported on death certificates, and how to select and 
tabulate the underlying cause of death. 
The aim of these instructions is to optimise the mortality statistics from a public health point 
of view. Some of the instructions may appear wrong or questionable from a purely medical 
perspective. They should still not be set aside, since they may be motivated by well-founded 
epidemiological and public health principles. If an apparent error is found, it should be 
reported to WHO through the online proposal mechanism. WHO will either explain the 
rationale or take steps to correct the error at the international level. Individual countries 
should not correct what is assumed to be an error, since changes at the national level will 
lead to data that are less comparable to data from other countries, and thus less useful for 
analysis. 


*** PAGE 66 (SRC 68) ***
 
66 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
2.15.1 What is tabulated: Underlying cause of death 
Effective public health interventions prevent harm or death by breaking the chain of events 
that lead to harm. For this purpose, the underlying cause of death has been defined as ‘(a) 
the disease or injury which initiated the train of morbid events leading directly to death, or 
(b) the circumstances of the accident or violence which produced the fatal injury’, and is 
selected for routine single-cause tabulation of mortality statistics. See Sections 2.17.2 
Selecting the underlying cause of death and 2.17 Coding instructions for mortality for 
specific coding instructions to identify the underlying cause of death. 
2.15.2 Data source: The international form of Medical Certificate of Cause of Death 
(MCCD) 
The international mortality coding instructions presuppose that data have been collected 
with a death certificate conforming to the international form of Medical Certificate of Cause 
of Death as recommended by the WHO. Frame A, the medical data part of the international 
form is split into two parts: Part 1 is for diseases related to the chain of events directly 
leading to death, and Part 2 is for other significant conditions contributing to death. Other 
information in the form is also used in identifying the underlying cause of death for 
tabulation. 
In order to align the way this information is collected internationally, the form should be 
followed as closely as possible. Otherwise, the causes of death cannot be coded and 
selected according to the international standard and the data will not be internationally 
comparable. For example, some coding instructions apply to conditions reported as caused 
by certain other conditions, and in such cases, it is important to have a clear distinction 
between causes reported in Part 1 and in Part 2 of the death certificate. Further, 
information reported elsewhere on the certificate, such as manner of death or whether 
pregnancy contributed to the death, is essential when assigning multiple cause codes to the 
conditions stated on the certificate and selecting an underlying cause for tabulation. 
It is the responsibility of the medical practitioner or other qualified certifier completing the 
medical certificate of cause of death (MCCD) to use their clinical judgment to indicate which 
morbid conditions led directly to death and to state any pre-existing conditions giving rise to 
this cause. Electronic certification systems should not include predetermined lists of causes 
of death to guide the certifier, as these necessarily limit the range of diagnoses and 
therefore have an adverse effect on the accuracy and usefulness of the report. 


*** PAGE 67 (SRC 69) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
67 
 
 
The 2016 International form of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death 
See 3.14 Annex C: Annexes for Mortality Coding for further details and guidance. 


*** PAGE 68 (SRC 70) ***
 
68 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
2.15.3 Routine use and special cases 
2.15.3.1 Routine cause of death reporting systems 
In routine cause of death reporting systems, every individual death is certified by a qualified 
medical doctor who carries out an accurate postmortem examination, collects history from 
relatives, and has access to all pre-existing medical information about the defunct. The 
medical certification of the cause of death is usually the responsibility of the attending 
physician and should be in line with international recommendations. Administrative 
procedures should ensure confidentiality of data from death certificates or other medical 
records. 
In the case of deaths certified by coroners or other legal authorities, the medical evidence 
supplied to the certifier should be stated on the certificate in addition to any legal findings. 
Routine cause of death reporting is usually embedded in the certification of death process. 
Death certificates are a legal requirement for burial and for inheritance. 
2.15.3.2 Verbal autopsy 
Verbal autopsy (VA) is a method used to ascertain the cause of a death based on an 
interview with next of kin or other caregivers where no medical certification is available. 
This is done using a standardised instrument that elicits information on signs, symptoms, 
medical history, and circumstances preceding death. The cause of death, or the sequence of 
causes that led to death, are assigned based on the data collected by the instrument and 
other available information. Rules and guidelines, algorithms or computer programs, may 
assist in evaluating the information to determine the cause of death. 
The main objective of the VA is to describe the causes of death at the community or 
population level in areas, where civil registration and death certification systems are weak 
and where most people die at home without having had contact with the health system. A 
standard VA instrument comprises a VA questionnaire, cause of death or mortality 
classification system, and diagnostic criteria (either expert or data derived algorithms) for 
deriving causes of death. 
The VA process consists of interviews, data recording, and identification of the cause of 
death from the reports. At any step, factors can influence the cause-specific mortality 
fractions estimated throughout the process. Besides research, VA is a viable method for 
causes of death identification in settings where no physician can evaluate the deceased. 
More information can be found on the WHO Verbal autopsy webpage. 
See 3.14.14 Target list of causes of death for verbal autopsy with corresponding ICD-11 
codes. 
2.16 Basic concepts 
Mortality coders must be familiar with the basic concepts introduced in this section. 


*** PAGE 69 (SRC 71) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
69 
 
 
Basic Concepts 
Basic concepts for mortality coding in the international form of the Medical Certificate of 
Cause of Death 
2.16.1 Terminal cause of death 
The disease or condition entered first on the first used line of Part 1 of the death certificate 
is the cause directly leading to death. This is known as the terminal or immediate cause of 
death. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Myocardial infarction 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Coronary atherosclerosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
The myocardial infarction is the terminal cause of death, since it is entered first on the first used line of 
the certificate. 


*** PAGE 70 (SRC 72) ***
 
70 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Myocardial infarction and pulmonary oedema 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Coronary atherosclerosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
The myocardial infarction is the terminal cause of death, since it is entered first on the first used line of 
the certificate. 
2.16.2 Causal relationship and sequence 
A causal relationship exists if a condition mentioned on the death certificate can be caused 
by another condition also mentioned on the certificate. The term ‘sequence’ refers to a 
chain or series of medical events in which each step is a complication of, or is caused by, the 
previous step. A causal relationship can exist between any two conditions, including 
conditions assigned to the same ICD-11 code, regardless of where each condition was 
reported. In a correctly completed death certificate, a sequence is a set of conditions 
reported line by line with a causal relationship between each element. Four lines are 
provided in Part 1 of the certificate for recording the sequence of events leading to the 
death. A certifier may only use as many lines as are required to describe the sequence. 
A causal relationship is considered acceptable for mortality coding if it is founded not only 
on a medical assessment but also on epidemiological and public health considerations. 
Therefore, a medically acceptable relationship might be listed as unacceptable in the coding 
instructions because a later step in the sequence is more important from a public health 
point of view. 
In addition, a reported sequence that appears improbable should be accepted if one or 
more intervening steps would explain the causal relationship, even if these have not been 
reported. However, such assumed intervening causes are not to be coded, as they are 
assumptions and not reported conditions. 
To decide whether a stated causal relationship is acceptable, always apply the instructions 
in Section 2.19.1 Special instructions on accepted and rejected sequences (Steps SP3 and 
SP4). Stated relationships that are not listed in Section 2.19.1 should be accepted as far as 
possible, because the certifier’s opinion about the causes leading to death should not be 
disregarded. 


*** PAGE 71 (SRC 73) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
71 
 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Myocardial infarction 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Coronary thrombosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c) Coronary atherosclerosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
The terminal cause of death is myocardial infarction. It is caused by the coronary thrombosis, which, in 
turn, is caused by coronary atherosclerosis. Consequently, the sequence is: myocardial infarction due to 
coronary thrombosis due to coronary atherosclerosis. 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Extensive haemorrhage 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Traumatic amputation of right leg 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c) Run over by a bus 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
The terminal cause of death is haemorrhage. It is a complication of the traumatic amputation of the right 
leg, which, in turn, is caused by the bus accident. Consequently, the sequence is: extensive haemorrhage 
due to traumatic amputation of the right leg due to being run over by a bus. 
2.16.3 Starting point 
The starting point is the condition or event that started the sequence of acceptable causal 
relationships ending with the terminal cause of death. In a correctly completed death 
certificate, the condition reported first on the lowest used line in Part 1 is the starting point 
of the sequence. The instructions on how to identify the starting point is provided in Section 
2.17.3 Find the starting point (Steps SP1 to SP8). 
If the death certificate is not correctly filled out, the starting point may be reported 
elsewhere, and instructions are given to identify the starting point also for such cases in a 
standardised manner. Therefore, it is important to apply the instructions in Section 2.17.3 in 
a sequential manner. 
The condition provisionally considered as the starting point when applying the instructions 
step by step is referred to as the ‘tentative starting point (TSP)’ and may change several 
times as the instructions are applied to the death certificate. 


*** PAGE 72 (SRC 74) ***
 
72 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Myocardial infarction and pulmonary oedema 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Coronary atherosclerosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Coronary atherosclerosis is the starting point, since it led to the myocardial infarction. 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Pneumonia 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Hip fracture 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c) Tripped on carpet 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Tripped on carpet is the starting point, since it started the sequence of events leading to death. 
2.16.4 Duration 
On death certificates, each reported condition should also include information about 
duration. The duration refers to the interval from the onset of the disease or condition to 
the time of death. Note that it is not always the same as the time of diagnosis of the 
condition, which may be at the same time as, or after, the onset of symptoms. 
2.16.5 First-mentioned sequence 
A death certificate may contain several sequences of acceptable causal relationships ending 
with the terminal cause of death. The coding instructions are given to identify the starting 
point of the first-mentioned sequence in Part 1 (See also Step SP4). 
The figures below illustrate examples of certificates where each condition reported is shown 
by a circle. The starting point of the first-mentioned sequence is in grey, and the causal 
relationship of the first-mentioned sequence is indicated by an arrow. 
To identify the first-mentioned sequence, begin with the terminal cause of death (the 
condition entered first on the first used line of Part 1). Check if the conditions on the next 
line in Part 1 can result in the terminal cause of death. If several conditions are reported on 
the same line, check from left to right in turn until you find a condition that could cause the 
terminal cause. 


*** PAGE 73 (SRC 75) ***
 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
73 
 
If no condition on the next line can cause the terminal cause of death, there is no sequence 
ending with the terminal cause of death. The terminal cause of death is the tentative 
starting point. Specific instruction is given also when you find no sequence (see Step SP5). 
 
NoSequence 
No Sequence ending with the terminal cause of death 
If there is a condition that can cause the terminal cause of death, the first condition found 
to be able to cause the terminal cause of death is the tentative starting point. If there are no 
conditions reported on lower lines, the sequence between this tentative starting point and 
the terminal cause is the first-mentioned sequence. 
 
First Mentioned Sequence A 
  
 
First Mentioned Sequence B 
  
If there are conditions reported on lower lines in Part 1, repeat the procedure for the next 
lower line. Start with the tentative starting point identified in the previous step. Check the 
conditions on the next lower line in Part 1, from left to right, to determine if they can cause 
the tentative starting point. Continue until you have found a condition that can cause the 
tentative starting point. This is the new tentative starting point. 


