 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
79 
 
To ensure consistent reporting of emerging conditions of international public health 
importance, WHO may sometimes publish special instructions for coding of named 
conditions, or selection of the underlying cause of death where named conditions are 
mentioned on the Medical Certificate Cause of Death (MCCD). This will usually involve codes 
in Chapter 25: Codes for special purposes - International provisional assignment of new 
diseases of uncertain aetiology and emergency use. Such special instructions should be 
applied in preference to any instructions in the Reference Guide that would otherwise 
apply. 
Once ICD codes are assigned to each disease or condition on the certificate, apply the 
instructions to select the underlying cause of death. Note that the full instructions include, 
in some cases, supplementary tables which are contained in the online Mortality Rules 
Knowledgebase as explained in Section 2.20 
2.17.2 Selecting the underlying cause of death 
For most death certificates, selecting the underlying cause of death is a straightforward 
procedure. There are, however, many cases where the underlying cause is not immediately 
obvious. To ensure that both straightforward and complex cases are coded according to the 
ICD mortality rules, it is important to follow the coding instructions carefully, step by step. 
Otherwise, the resulting mortality statistics will not be internationally comparable, which 
seriously reduces the value of the data for public health purposes. 
Selecting the underlying cause of death involves two separate steps. The first step is to 
identify the starting point (Steps SP1 through SP8 below). The next step is to modify the 
starting point, if any of the modification instructions apply, to reflect further information 
provided on the death certificate (Steps M1 through M4 below). See Sections 2.18 - 2.19 for 
specific instructions. In addition, Mortality Annex ERROR includes a workflow diagram to 
illustrate the coding instructions for the selection of the underlying cause of death. This is 
intended as a supplement to help coders follow the coding instructions. 
Note that the purpose of the selection procedure is to produce the most useful mortality 
statistics possible. Thus, the following instructions may reflect the importance of some 
conditions for public health rather than what is correct from a purely medical point of view. 
The following instructions always apply, whether they might be considered medically 
correct or not. 
In the coding examples that follow, the ‘due to’ statement between the lines in Part 1 is not 
included. But it is important to bear in mind that anything reported on an upper line in Part 
1 is meant to be due to what is reported on the line below. 
