 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
87 
 
2.17.11 Step SP8 – Conditions unlikely to cause death 
If the tentative starting point selected in Steps SP1 to SP7 is in the List of conditions unlikely 
to cause death (see Mortality Annex 3.14.10, and: 
• 
If all other conditions reported on the certificate are also unlikely to cause death or 
ill-defined, then keep this condition ‘unlikely to cause death’ as the starting point. 
Next, go to Step M1. 
• 
If this condition was the cause of another condition that is not ‘unlikely to cause 
death’ and that is not ill-defined, then keep this condition unlikely to cause death as 
the starting point. Next, go to Step M1. 
• 
If the death was caused by a reaction to treatment of the condition unlikely to cause 
death, select the reaction to treatment as the starting point. Next, go to Step M1 
• 
If none of these three apply, and there is at least one condition that is not ‘unlikely 
to cause death’ and not ‘ill-defined’, then disregard the condition unlikely to cause 
death. Go to Step SP1 and select another starting point, as if the condition unlikely to 
cause death had not been mentioned on the certificate. 
If the tentative starting point is not in the ‘List of conditions unlikely to cause death’, keep 
that condition as the starting point and go to Step M1. 
If the certificate mentions more than one treatment for the condition unlikely to cause 
death, select the first-mentioned treatment. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Hearing loss 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Ischaemic heart disease 
Hearing loss is the tentative starting point (Step SP2), but it in the ‘List of conditions considered unlikely 
to cause death’. There is another condition on the certificate, ischaemic heart disease, which is not in the 
‘List of conditions considered unlikely to cause death’. Disregard hearing loss and restart the selection 
procedure from Step SP1. Ischaemic heart disease is the new starting point (Step SP1). 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Liver failure 
 
 
(b) Excessive use of paracetamol 
 
 
(c) Migraine-type headache 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Migraine type headache is the tentative starting point (Step SP3), but it is in the ‘List of conditions 
considered unlikely to cause death’. Migraine type headache was treated with paracetamol and there was 
a reaction to the treatment, liver failure. Select the reaction to the treatment, liver failure, as the starting 
point. 
