 
88 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 3  
 
 
 
1 (a) Sepsis 
 
 
(b) Submandibular abscess 
 
 
(c) Caries 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Caries is the tentative starting point (Step SP3), but it is in the ‘List of conditions considered unlikely to 
cause death’. In this case caries caused submandibular abscess, a condition that is not unlikely to cause 
death and that is not ill-defined. Because of that, keep caries as the starting point. 
Example 4  
 
 
 
1 (a) Headache 
 
 
(b) Caries 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Ischaemic heart disease 
Caries is the tentative starting point (Step SP3), but it is in the ‘List of conditions considered unlikely to 
cause death’. In this case caries caused headache, a condition that is in the list of ill-defined conditions. 
Disregard both caries (Step SP8) and headache (Step SP7) and restart the selection procedure from Step 
SP1. Ischaemic heart disease is the new starting point (Step SP1). 
2.18 Check for modifications of the starting point (Steps M1 to M4) 
The starting point identified using Steps SP1 to SP8 is now considered the tentative 
underlying cause. There may be special coding instructions on this tentative underlying 
cause, or other reasons to modify the tentative underlying cause. Check whether the 
tentative underlying cause should be modified by applying the modification rules described 
in steps M1 to M3 (Modification rule 1 to Modification rule 3). Each step contains one 
modification rule. At each step, there is a description of the modification rule itself and what 
to do next. There are also bullet points with more detailed instructions and explanations. 
2.18.1 Step M1 – Special instructions 
If the tentative underlying cause (TUC) selected in Steps SP1 to SP8 applies to a special 
instruction listed in Section 2.19.3 Special instructions on linkages and other provisions (Step 
M1), assign a new tentative underlying cause according to the instruction. 
Next, reapply Step M1 to the new tentative underlying cause. Repeat until you have found a 
tentative underlying cause that is not affected by any further special coding instruction. 
Next, go to Step M2. 
If the tentative underlying cause does not apply to instructions in Section 2.19.3, go to Step 
M2. 
If more than one instruction in Section 2.19.3 applies to the tentative underlying cause, 
select the instruction relating to the priority underlying condition (see Section 2.16.7). 
Note that there are two types of combinations of codes, ‘with mention of’ and ‘when 
reported as a cause of’. Refer to Section 2.19.3 for details. 
