 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
91 
 
one code providing more precise information about the site or nature of the tentative 
starting point. This code is the new tentative underlying cause of death. 
Next, reapply Step M2 to the new tentative underlying cause. Repeat until you have found a 
tentative underlying cause that cannot be specified further. 
• If there is no term that further specifies the tentative underlying cause (TUC), go to Step 
M3. 
• If there are several other expressions that provide more precise information on the 
tentative underlying cause, select the priority underlying condition (see Section 2.16.7). 
• If the TUC is an unspecified condition and this condition appears with more specificity 
somewhere on the death certificate, this last more specific condition should be considered 
as the new TUC. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Meningitis 1D01.Z 
 
 
(b) Tuberculosis 1B1Z 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Tuberculosis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). A term providing more precise information about 
the site or nature of this condition is reported on the certificate: menigitis. There is a provision in the 
classification to combine the two codes, and according to instruction of step M2, tuberculous meningitis 
(1B11.0) is a new tentative underlying cause. 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Syphilis, unspecified 1A6Z 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Primary genital syphilis 1A61.0 
Syphilis, is the tentative starting point (Step SP2). A more specific condition for syphilis appears 
elsewhere on the death certificate: primary genital syphilis, and according to instruction of step M2, 
primary genital syphilis is a new tentative underlying cause. 
Example 3  
 
 
 
1 (a) Acute gastrointestinal bleeding ME24.90 
 
 
(b) Malignant neoplasms of colon, unspecified 2B90.Z 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Malignant neoplasm of transverse colon 2B90.2 
Malignant neoplasms of colon, is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). A more specific condition appears 
elsewhere on the death certificate: malignant neoplasm of transverse colon, and according to instruction 
of step M2, malignant neoplasm of transverse colon 2B90.2 is a new tentative underlying cause. 
