 
ICD-11 Reference Guide 
93 
 
If the tentative underlying cause is the same with the starting point selected in Step SP1 to 
SP8, go to Step M4. 
• 
Do not go back to Step SP6 if the cause selected in Step M1 or M2 is correctly 
reported as due to another condition, except when this condition is ill-defined. 
• 
Also, do not go back to Step SP6 if the tentative underlying cause is a reaction to 
treatment of a condition unlikely to cause death, as selected in Step SP8. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Sepsis 
 
 
(b) Arterial disease, arterial embolism of left leg 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Colon cancer 
Arterial disease is the tentative starting point according to Step SP3. Arterial embolism of 
left leg, reported as the second condition on line 1(b), is a specific type of arterial disease. 
Therefore, select arterial embolism of left leg as the tentative underlying cause in Step M2. 
Reapply Step SP6, because the tentative starting point is not the same as the one selected in 
Steps SP1 to SP8. But colon cancer is an obvious cause of arterial embolism, and colon 
cancer is the new starting point. No further modifications apply. Code colon cancer (2B90.Z), 
Malignant neoplasms of colon, unspecified) as the underlying cause of death. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Sepsis 
 
 
(b) Arterial disease, arterial embolism of left leg 
 
 
(c) Atherosclerosis 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Colon cancer 
Atherosclerosis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). There is a special instruction on ‘atherosclerosis 
reported as the cause of arterial disease’, and, according to this instruction, arterial disease is the new 
starting point according to Step M1. Arterial embolism of left leg, reported as the second condition on line 
1(b), is a more specific description of the type of arterial disease and is selected as the tentative starting 
point in Step M2. Do not reapply Step SP6, because arterial embolism of left leg is reported as due to 
atherosclerosis, and this is a correct causal relationship. No further modifications apply. Code ‘arterial 
embolism of left leg’ as the underlying cause of death. 
2.18.4 Step M4 - Instructions on medical procedures, main injury, poisoning, and 
maternal deaths 
Finally, apply the following instructions to the tentative underlying cause selected by 
applying Steps SP1 to SP8 and Steps M1 to M3. 
If the tentative underlying cause is: 
