 
78 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
2.16.8 Modification 
Special coding instructions on specific sequences and ICD categories may have the effect 
that a condition other than the starting point is selected as the underlying cause of death for 
use in the statistics. In such cases, the code for underlying cause often expresses a 
combination of the starting point with another reported condition, or a complication or 
consequence of the starting point that is of particular importance to public health. The 
procedure by which the ICD code for the starting point is replaced by another code is called 
modification. Instructions on how to apply these special instructions to identify the 
underlying cause of death is given in Section 2.18 Check for modifications of the starting 
point (Steps M1 to M4). 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Heart disease 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(b) Generalised atherosclerosis 
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
 
due to 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Generalised atherosclerosis started the sequence of events leading to death, so it is the starting point. 
However, according to a special instruction on generalised atherosclerosis, generalised atherosclerosis 
leading to heart disease is assigned to atherosclerotic heart disease in mortality statistics. Because of this 
modification, atherosclerotic heart disease is the underlying cause of death. 
2.17 Coding instructions for mortality 
When coding causes of death, first assign ICD codes to all the conditions mentioned on the 
death certificate. Many coding instructions are based on specific ICD codes, and to 
determine whether or not any of the instructions apply, all conditions on the certificate 
must be coded. Other conditions reported on the certificate may affect the coding any 
condition. Assigning codes for all reported conditions and applying any effect one code has 
on another is called multiple cause coding. 
2.17.1 Basic coding and multiple cause coding guidelines 
To start coding, refer to basic coding guidelines given in sections in the beginning of Part 2 
(for example Sections2.1, 2.6, and 2.10.1. When multiple causes are reported also refer to 
Section 2.21 Coding instructions for mortality: multiple cause coding and other specific 
instructions. Multiple cause coding permits in-depth analysis of causes of death, for example 
of serious but avoidable complications of certain underlying causes, and the impact of 
coexisting conditions on the outcome of a disease process. Therefore, in mortality coding, 
both underlying cause and multiple causes should be recorded. Complete multiple cause 
coding is essential for a correct application of the ICD instructions for selection and 
modification of the underlying cause of death. 
