 
86 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 4  
 
 
 
1 (a) Sepsis 
 
 
(b) Peritonitis 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Mesenteric embolism, rupture appendicitis 
Sepsis can be caused by peritonitis, and peritonitis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). Next, both 
mesenteric embolism and ruptured appendicitis are obvious causes of peritonitis. Because mesenteric 
embolism is mentioned first and is the priority underlying condition, it is the new tentative starting point. 
Example 5  
 
 
 
1 (a) Sepsis 
 
 
(b) Peritonitis 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Necrosis of intestine, mesenteric infarction 
Sepsis can be caused by peritonitis, and peritonitis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). Necrosis of 
intestine is an obvious cause of peritonitis, so necrosis of intestine is the new tentative starting point. 
Next, mesenteric infarction is an obvious cause of necrosis of intestine, and mesenteric infarction is the 
final starting point. 
2.17.10 Step SP7 – Ill-defined conditions 
If the tentative starting point selected in Steps SP1 to SP6 is in the List of ill-defined 
conditions, and: 
• 
If there is at least one condition that is not ill-defined, then disregard the ill-defined 
condition. Go to Step SP1 and select another starting point, as if the ill-defined 
condition had not been mentioned on the certificate. 
• 
If all other conditions reported on the certificate, are ill- defined, go to Step M1. 
If the tentative starting point is not ill-defined, go to Step SP8. 
Note that the following are not considered ill-defined: 
3.14.6 List of ill-defined conditions. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Respiratory failure 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Mesenteric embolism 
Respiratory failure is the only condition mentioned in Part 1 and it is the tentative starting point 
according to Steps SP2. Respiratory failure is in the table of ill-defined conditions, and there is a condition 
not ill-defined, Mesenteric embolism, so disregard respiratory failure and restart the selection procedure. 
Mesenteric embolism is the new starting point according to Step SP1. 
