 
84 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 2  
 
 
 
1 (a) Bronchopneumonia 
 
 
(b) Cerebral infarction and liver metastases 
 
 
(c) Atherosclerosis and stomach cancer 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Atherosclerosis cannot cause liver metastases (Step SP3 does not apply). There are three acceptable 
sequences on the certificate: (1) bronchopneumonia caused by cerebral infarction, in its turn caused by 
atherosclerosis; (2) bronchopneumonia caused by cerebral infarction, in its turn caused by stomach 
cancer; and (3) bronchopneumonia caused by liver metastases, in its turn caused by stomach cancer. The 
first-mentioned sequence is bronchopneumonia caused by cerebral infarction, in its turn caused by 
atherosclerosis. Consequently, atherosclerosis is the tentative starting point. 
2.17.8 Step SP5 – Terminal cause of death when no sequence 
If no sequence ending with the terminal cause of death is reported in Part 1, the terminal 
cause of death is also the tentative starting point. Next, go to Step SP6. 
Example 1  
 
 
 
1 (a) Liver metastases 
 
 
(b) Cerebral infarction 
 
 
(c) Atherosclerosis 
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Stomach cancer 
Atherosclerosis cannot cause liver metastases (Step SP3 does not apply). Cerebral infarction cannot cause 
liver metastases (Step SP4 does not apply). No sequence ending with the terminal cause of death is 
reported in Part 1, so the terminal cause of death – liver metastases – is the tentative starting point. 
2.17.9 Step SP6 – Obvious cause 
If the tentative starting point selected in Steps SP1 to SP5 was obviously caused by another 
condition on the certificate, select the obvious cause as the new tentative starting point. 
Conditions that are considered to have an ‘obvious’ causal relationship are specified in 
Section 2.19.2 Special instructions on obvious cause (Step SP6). To identify which Part of the 
certificate you should search for, apply following rules: 
• 
If the tentative starting point is in Part 1, the obvious cause must be either on the 
same or lower line, in Part 1, or in Part 2. Do not look for obvious causes on lines 
above the tentative starting point. 
• 
If the tentative starting point is in Part 2, the obvious cause must also be in Part 2. 
Do not look for obvious causes in Part 1. 
Next, reapply Step SP6 to the new tentative starting point. Continue looking for a new 
tentative starting point until you find a tentative starting point that is not obviously caused 
by a condition reported on the same line or further down on the certificate. Then go to Step 
SP7. 
If there is no condition reported on the certificate that obviously caused the tentative 
starting point selected in Steps SP2 to SP5, go to Step SP7. 
