 
90 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
Example 4  
 
 
 
1 (a) Ischaemic heart disease 
 
 
(b) Atherosclerosis 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Myocardial infarction 
Atherosclerosis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). There is a special instruction on ‘atherosclerosis 
reported with mention of ischaemic heart disease’, and another one on ‘atherosclerosis reported with 
mention of myocardial infarction’. Ischaemic heart disease is the priority underlying condition, so apply 
the instruction on ‘atherosclerosis reported with mention of ischaemic heart disease’ and select ischaemic 
heart disease as the new starting point. Next, there is a special instruction on ‘ischaemic heart disease 
reported with mention of myocardial infarction’. Apply this instruction and select myocardial infarction 
as the new tentative underlying cause. 
Examples of ‘when reported as the cause of’: 
Example 5  
 
 
 
1 (a) Chronic kidney disease 
 
 
(b) Atherosclerosis 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
 
Atherosclerosis is the tentative starting point (Step SP3). There is a special instruction on ‘atherosclerosis 
reported as the cause of chronic kidney disease’. Apply this instruction and select hypertensive renal 
disease (BA02) as the new tentative underlying cause. 
Example 6  
 
 
 
1 (a) Atherosclerosis 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
2  
Chronic kidney disease 
Atherosclerosis is the tentative starting point (Step SP2). Although there is a special instruction on 
‘atherosclerosis reported as the cause of chronic kidney disease’, this instruction does not apply here 
because chronic kidney disease is reported in Part 2 and not as caused by atherosclerosis. In this case, 
atherosclerosis remains the tentative starting point. 
2.18.2 Step M2 – Specificity 
If the tentative underlying cause describes a condition in general terms and another term 
that provides more precise information about the site or nature of the same condition is 
reported on the certificate, use the more informative term. This rule will often apply when 
the general term becomes an adjective, qualifying the more precise term. 
If the tentative underlying cause is an infectious disease reported as the cause of a specific 
manifestation, there may be a provision in the classification to combine the two codes into 
