 
94 
 
ICD-11 MMS  
 
• 
Surgery, another type of medical procedure, a complication or postprocedural 
condition, apply the instructions in Section 2.19.4 Special instructions on surgery and 
other medical procedures (Step M4). 
• 
In Chapter 22 ‘Injury, poisoning or certain other consequences of external causes’, 
first code the external cause of the injury or poisoning as the underlying cause of 
death. Also add the main injury to the cluster by following instructions in Section 
2.19.5 Special instructions on main injury in deaths from external causes (Step M4). 
• 
In Chapter 23 ‘External causes of morbidity and mortality’ also add the main injury to 
the cluster by following instructions in Section 2.19.5 Special instructions on main 
injury in deaths from external causes (Step M4). 
• 
Poisoning, use additional extension code from Section X (Extension Codes), if 
applicable, to identify the specific name of drug or toxic substance reported. If more 
than one drug or toxic substance is reported on the certificate, apply instructions in 
Section 2.19.6 Special instructions on poisoning by drugs, medications and biological 
substances (Step M4), to identify the drug, medicament or substance most likely to 
have caused the death. 
If the decedent is a woman, and pregnancy, childbirth or puerperium is reported on the 
certificate, determine whether to code the tentative underlying cause to Chapter 18 
‘Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium’ according to the instructions in Section 2.19.7 
Special instructions on maternal mortality (Step M4). 
When creating a cluster in Step M4, always put the code for the underlying cause of death 
at the beginning of the cluster. 
After applying Step M4, the tentative underlying cause, modified or not, becomes the 
underlying cause of death. 
If Step M4 does not apply, the tentative underlying cause becomes the underlying cause of 
death. 
Note that other restrictions may apply, for example that the cause is limited to one of the 
sexes (see also Sections 2.21.7 and 3.14 (3.14.11 and 3.14.12)) or to a specific age range, or 
that the cause of death is improbable, considering the geographical setting. Therefore, 
always check whether any such restrictions apply to the underlying cause you selected. 
2.19 Special instructions on selecting the underlying cause of death 
The following sections are to be referred to in applying each instruction of Section 2.17.3 
(Steps SP1 to SP8) and Section 2.18 (Steps M1 to M4). 
2.19.1 Special instructions on accepted and rejected sequences (Steps SP3 and SP4) 
This section lists sequences of causes of death that should be accepted or rejected when 
selecting the underlying cause of death. As described in Section 2.16.2 Causal relationship 
and sequence, these instructions are set with the aim of producing the most useful 
mortality statistics. Individual countries should not correct what is assumed to be an error, 
since changes at the national level will lead to data that are less comparable to data from 
other countries, and thus less useful for analysis. 
